# Notes 2014-08-27

## Three kinds of neurons - anatomy
* **unipolar neurons** - a single extension that branches in two directions, forming a receptive pole and an output zone
* **bipolar neurons** - one axon, one dendrite -- usually sensory
* **multipolar neurons** - one axon, many dendrites -- most common type

Different types of neurons have different functions. Computers don't have the same kinds of problems as neurons.
For a sensory system, you'd want a unipolar neuron as it's the fastest neuron. It goes straight through.
* Unipolar -- representation does not matter. Unipolar is the *most reliable* transmitting neuron.

Multipolar will allow you to get information from all parts of the brain. *The brain is primarily composed of multipolar neurons*.

Bipolar are pretty useless. There is one part that uses it: **the eye**.

## Four zones of a neuron
* Input zone - neurons collect and integrate information either form the environment or forom other cells
* Integration zone - decision to produce a neural signal is made
* Conduction zone - information over long distances
* Output zone - neuron transfers information to other cells

Cell boody is in input and integration for multipolar and bipolar.
In monopolar the cell body is in the conduction zone.

## Three kinds of neurons - function
* Sensory neurons - respond to environment, such as light, odor, or touch
* Motoneurons - contact muscles or glands
* Interneurons - receive input from and send input to other neurons -- integration. Most common

```
Sense -> Inter -> Motor
eye       CNS     PNS
```
CNS = central nervous system
PNS = peripheral nervous system

**Glial Cells** -- support the brain
Below are 4 types:
* astrocytes
* oligodendrocytes
* ependymal cells
* microglia

Glial cells are very important in brain disorders. Migraine -- reason is a glial cell.

### Astrocytes
* Attached to a capillary and a neuron. Serves as the liason between the blood vessel and the neuron.
* Looks like a star, hence being called an astrocyte
* Most numerous glial cell in the brain
* Fills spaces between neurons for support
  * Keeps the neurons in place
* Regulate composition of the extracellular space

You need a very precise distance between neurons, like spark plugs. Astrocytes keep the brain's cells in the correct positions.

#### Case
Astrocyte - oma(tumor)
This guy got headaches because of astrocytoma.
Medulla lets you breathe. The tumor causes the medulla to die.

#### Rolf
15 month old boy admitted for continual screaming, vomiting, and enlarging head
The center of the brain is white but the outer part is not ok.
He deteriorated and died 3 weeks later.

Alexander's disease -- astrocytes fill up with GFAP, then fail

### Oligodendrocytes
Wrap axons with myelin sheaths inside brain and spinal cord.

* Each oligodendrocyte wraps several axons.
* Wraps axons with myelin
* Oligo - few, dendrocyte
* Insulation for the axons. Maintains electrical integrity -- they don't short out.
* **Node of Ranvier** - gap between the myelin. Guaranteed test question

#### Multiple sclerosis
* Oligodendrocyte injury from autoimmune attack. Damages the myelin.
* Sometimes the immune system attacks the axons as well.
* Treatment -- block the immune system

They destroy one myelin thing but they don't destroy the ones next to it.

### Microglia and Ependymal cells
* Ependymal -- creates spinal fluid
* Microglia -- Clean up the brain when neurons die. Immune cells.

#### Sometimes glial cells do us harm
* Viral activated microglia from HIV
* **encephalitis** - inflamation of the brain

## Neurons
* Many kinds, many shapes
* **presynaptic neuron** -- neuron before the synapse
* **postsynaptic neuron** -- neuron after the synapse
* **dendritic spines** -- increases surface area of a dendrite
* Dendritic spines have ***neural plasticity** - their number and structure are rapidly altered by experience

## Synapses
* presynaptic and postsynaptic terminals
* **preganglionic neurons** - from CNS to autonomic ganglia (automatic as in you don't think about it)
* **postgangliongic neurons** -- from automatic ganglia to targets in the body
* Preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord -- innervate **sympathetic chain**
* **Sympathetic activation** -- prepares the body for ation
* **Parasympathetic activation** -- rests and digests

## Which way is which?
* Afferent -- impulses into a region of interest (sensory)
* Efferent -- impulses away from a region of interest (motor)

**Memorize the directional terms**

* coronal -- separates brain from front to back. Resembles a butterfly.
* **sagittal** -- slices the brain down the midline so you can see what's on each half
* **horizontal** -- separates top from bottom

White matter -- composed of axon bundles. Oligodendrocytes. (myelin is fat, which is white)
Gray matter -- composed of clusters of cell bodies, have dark gray appearance.

Four cortical lobes -- named after the bones of the skull in which the lobes lie
* Frontal lobe
* Temporal (bottom) lobe
* Parietal lobe (mid-back)
* Occipital lobe (back)

## Parts of the brain
* Basal ganglia -- movement control. The fundamental purpose of the brain is to move.
* Limbic system -- emotional memory, regulation
* Diencephalon -- our first brain in human evolution: powers reflexive control of our behavior
* Midbrain -- Where your consciousness is, also puts you to sleep
* Pons -- contains motor and sensory nuclei to face
* Medulla -- transition of brain to spinal cord, heart rate, breathing
* Cerebellum -- motor coordination and learning

* Meninges -- brain wrappings
* Dura mater -- hard mother, outside of the brain
* Pia mater -- soft mother, touches the brain. Like wrapping paper or ceiling tiles
Between the pia mater and the dura mater is the arachnoid space

Cerebral ventricles -- make CSF
Hydrocephalus -- spinal fluid in the brain. Blockage of the spinal fluid canal

Cortex -- six distinct layers -- "neocortex"
Pachygyria -- Pachy is thick, gyrus is fold of brain. 3 cortical layers, you should have 6.

### Major blood vessels
Anterior cerebral artery -- Top of brain
Middle cerebral artery -- side of brain
Posterior cerebral artery -- back of brain
