## Scans
* CT scan --- computerized axial tomography
  * X-ray absorption shows tissue density
  * Black stuff is not dense -- fluid. Gray stuff is brain, white stuff is bone or blood
* MRI -- magnetic resonance imaging
  * High-res imaging
  * Strong magnets cause protons to line up parallel
  * Radio waves knock over protons
  * Protons emit radio waves that differ by tissue density
* PET scan -- positron emission tomography
  * Brain activity
  * Uses radioactive chemicals and maps destination by their emissions
  * Identifies which brain regions contribute to which functions
* fMRI -- functional MRI
  * detects changes in brain metabolism, like oxygen use, in active brain areas
  * shows how networks of structures collaborate

## Histology
* Soma -- cell body
* Rough ER -- makes proteins
* Smooth ER -- regulates composition of cytoplasm
* Golgi Apparatus -- packages products for shipment in cell
  * Alex -- Lowe syndrome. Had huge cataracts in his eyes and is now severely retarded. Golgi fails.
* Lipid bilayer membrane -- charge separator
* Intrinsic proteins -- receptors, ion channels; give neurons necessary properties for signaling
* Microtubules are big, neurofilaments are smaller. Neurofilaments are like girders
* Axoplasmic transport -- material is moved from the soma to terminals using **anterograde transport** using **kinesin** as the enabling protein
  * Kinesin walks along the microtubule
* Retrograde transport -- opposite, uses **dynein**
  * Lissencephaly -- when microtubules don't work properly
* Mitochondria
  * MELAS syndrome: mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke
    * Mitochondrial energy failure
* Size matters -- larger neurons have more complex inputs and outputs

## How neurons work

### Sheila
Sheila cut her leg and was stiched up. 3 days later her face began to ache. She had tetanus.

## The big picture
* Key: semipermeable membrane
* Neurons are just batteries -- they store charge to use when needed
* Lipid bilayer separates the cell
* Interior of the cell is negatively charged due to negatively charged proteins
* Neurons are selectively permeable to K+ -- can enter or leave the cell freely
* Membrane is slightly permeable to sodium ions so they slowly leak in
* Only K+ has more ions in the cell than out.
* Tetrodoxin --- fugu
  * Blocks nerve action by binding to sodium ion channels in neuron membranes
  * A man ate fugu and collapsed
* How is stored charge used?
  * Graded and action potential
* Action potential is all or nothing

## Ionic basis of action potential
1. Voltage-gated Na+ channels (gated based on charge of the cell) open in response to initial depolarization
2. More voltage-gated channels open and more Na+ ions enter until membrane potential reaches +40 mV
3. Resting potential is back when potassium goes out through voltage gates

## Refractory periods
* **Absolute refractory phase (AR)** - no more action potentials can be produced

