## Intro
* Look for the eclipsed structure and staggered one if you need to rank based off of stability.
* The staggered one is the one you want to look at. This is important.
* Staggered is more stable than the eclipsed conformation where the bond angle is less than 60 degrees. 

## Cyclohexane
* 1,3 diaxial interaction -- main reason to cause the structure to be very unstable
* Consider these interactions
* Look for the ones that have the diaxial interaction -- have the big substituent in the axial position
* Equatorial position is the sable one. You want to have the big compounds in equatorial, this is the most stable.
* Chair conformation is the most important structure to know.
* t-Butyl has to be in the equatorial position. It is very big, it is very bulky, if you oput it on the axial then you have a lot of strain because of the 1,3 diaxial interaction. 99% of the time t-Butyl will be in the equatorial, not the axial!!

## Finish Chapter 3
* Bicyclic system -- fused ring system
* You have to know how to name cyclic systems. Bicyclic systems are very easty to name
* When they fuse together, you add "bicyclo" to the naming.
* In the structuure you count the total number of carbon in the tructure on the left ring, the right ring, then the bridge.
* So two cyclohexanes fused would be bicyclo[4,4,0]decane.
* bicyclic system is all about nomenclature -- we don;t talk about it now
* You have the bridge in the carbon. It's just the naming
* The numbering syste is very simple.
* Check the carbon you have on each side, put them in alphabetical order, and simple.

# Chapter 5 -- Stereochemistry
* The most difficult chapter!!!! UH OH
* This is what the model kit is for. **You can bring the model kit to the exam**
* In this chapter we are going to be talking a lot about the enantiomers.
* diastereomers have cis-trans and other diastereomers.

## Chirality
* Chiral object has a mirror-image that is different from the original obhject
* Non-superimposable. You cannot put them on top of each other.
* When you put the chair in the mirror, they are not chiral.
* It's all about the mirror image. A non-superimposable mirror image is chiral.
* They are DIFFERENT.
* Enantiomer pair -- two chiral molecules in a pair.

## Stereocenters
* Chiral molecule has one chiral center. Just a central atom that connects to four different substituents.
  * The carbon is called an asymmetric carbon
  * One chiral center, that is a chiral carbon, that is a chiral molecule, and it is just as simple as that
  * Four different substituents.
* Stereocenter can be swapped

## Asymmetric carbon atom
* 2-Bromobutane -- example for an asymmetric carbon atom

## Non-chiral Carbon Atom
* Bonded to only 3 different groups
* Two of the four groups on carbon are the same
* You need to have all 4 diifferent for a chiral carbon.

## Summary
* No chiral carbon -- achiral
* one chiral carbon -- chiral
* more than one chiral carbon -- cannot say, need to use the mirror image

## Mirror Plane of Symmetry
* Look for the symmetrical plane within the molecule
* A mirror plane of symmetry makes a molecule NOT chiral.
* Trans 1,2-dichlorocyclopentane -- you can't have a mirror plane of symmetry, so it is NOT chiral.

## (R), (S) Nomenclature

### Use the Cahn-Ingold-Prelog Rules
* Highest atomic number assigned the highest priority
* Hydrogen is always the lowest priority.
* Look at the atom directly connected to the chiral carbon.
* (R) is clockwise, (S) is counterclockwise
  * clockwise with respect to 1, 2, 3.
* Look down the chain in case of ties
* Double and triple bonds are treated like bonds to duplicate atoms.

## Properties of Enantiomers
* Same boiling point, melting point, density
* Same refractive index
* Different rotation direction in polarimeter
* Different interaction with other chiral molecules

## Polarimetry
* Optical activity
* Not related to (R) and (S)

## Mobile conformers
* When you have a carbon that can rotate, they are not always chiral
* The bond can rotate
* Look at the most symmetric configuration of the molecule

## Nonmobile Conformers
* If conformer is sterical hindered, it may exist as enantiomers
* two staggered conformations -- cannot rotate past
* The chiral configuration that is impossible does not count

##  Allenes
* 2,3-entadiene is chiral

## Fischer Projections
* Very important!
* 2d drawing representing the 3d structure of the molecule
* A chiral carbon is at the intersection of horizontal and vertical lines
* Horizontal is forward, out-of-plane
* Vertical is behind the plane
* Cannot rotate 90 degrees -- only 180 is allowed
  * wrong orientation if 90
  *
