* alkane -- only has sigma bonds
* alkene has dobule bonds but you need to lose two hydrogens
* alkyne has triple bonds -- lose 4 hydrogens
* the smaller the size the lower the boilling point
* Butane has 2 forms -- n butane and isobutane. You can have 2 forms on it. Consitutional isomers have the samemolecular formula but the carbons are connected dfifferently
* when you see al ong hydrocarbon chaine, the name will have an “n” at the front
* n means in a straight chain.
* When you have something small attached to the main chain, the name will be a little different, e.g. isobutane
* These are consitutional isomers
* You have a total of 5 carbons in pentane -- n pentane, isopentane, neopentane (like a plus).
  * 3 constitutional isomers
* IUPAC -- the standawrd method used internationally for naming compounds
* IUPAC rules -- the rules that determine the naming of these compounds.
* RUle 1: the main chain: find the longest chain of consecutive carbons. The longest chain in the powerlpooinds os 6 carbons -- hexane. Lonkgest chain first, this is rule 1.
* each carbon is assigned a number -- you have to name them in order so you cna give substiotuents id numbers for when you have the functional groups attached.
* Rule 2: start with teh end that is closest to the substituent. This will keep the numbers low. The methane in 3-methylhexane is attached to the closest side. This is a very nice convention as it keeps things consistent and easy.
* When there are two chains of equal length, use the chain with the greatest number of substituents.
* IF two substituents are **equidistant**, look for the next closest group.
* Rule 3: Naming Alkyl groups -- name the groups attached to the longest chain as alkyl groups
* Gieve the location of each alkyl group
*Write the a;kyl groups in alphabetical order regardless of their position in the chain. ALPHABETICAL OREDER
* Alphebatize substituents by name
* Two or more identical substituents: di, tri, etc. Ignore di, tri etc for alphabetizing
* Total of 7 carbon in the main chain: 3-ethyl-2,6-dimethuylheptane
* Common alkyl groups -- methyl, etihyl , propyl, isopropyl, butyl, isobutyl, sec-butyl, tert-butyl (or t-butyl group)
* Classification of carbon and hydrogen: primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary carbons
* Naming haloalkanes -- alkanes containing halogens. They are just another group like “bromo” or “fluoro”
* Complex usbstituents -- complex alkyl groups are named by using the longest carbon chain
* Carbon number 1 of the alkyl group is the carbon attached to the main chain

