## Propane
* Draw the three hydrogens in the newman projectiomn, and in the back carbon we have two hydrogens, they all connect to the back carbon so you draw a carcle.
* The circle in the newman projection is the back atom.
* Simialr to ethane, it's callled a dihedral angle between the two atoms.
* Eclipsed conformation is when you have a lot of interaction and overlap.
* Dihedral angle goes from 0 to 60 degrees ion teh staggered conformation, which is the preferred.
* When you have a lot of overlap again in 120, it is again eclipsed.
* Staggered is much more stable than when you have an eclipsed conformation

##  Butane
* Butane is CH3 connected to two CH2 then another CH3 -- four carbon chain
* If you wantto draw an ewman projection of carbon a1 and carbon 2, you have 3 hydrogen conected to the fron atom and one carbon atached in the bavack
* That is cgoing to be similar to ethane and propane but oyu consider carbon two and carbon 3
* Carbon 3 has two hydrogen and one methyl group attached to the carbon.
* The newman priojection has two hydrogen and one methyl on the front and back atoms.
* The dihedral angle also exists here.
* Wgehen the dihedral ange is equal to 0 it is called totally ecliupsed -- not eclispsed
* The cloud of election in methyl is very big -- interact in the baclk
* Energy level is very high in the totally eclipsed conformation -- not stable
* When you separate by 60 degrees, it's called gauche. It's another way to say staggered, bht there are ultiple staggred conformations so it has another name
* Eclipsed conformation is at 120 degrees. When the theta angle is 0 it is totally eclipsed.
* In anticonformation you have them 180 degrees very far away from each other. This is the preferred wmethod and it is more stable than gauche or eclispwdxd 
* So totlaly eclipsed is highest energy.
* 180 degrees you have inti
* When you have 120 it's eclipsed and higher energy than astaggered
* When you have 60 it's gauge.
* conformation analysis graph is important
  * totally eclipsed is the highest energy
  * gauche has lower energy
  * eclipsed has higer than gauche but lower than tiotall eeclosped 
  * anti is the lowest energy.
  * You have interactions between the fron methjyl and the back methyl, and it is not as much as methyl interacting with hydrogen
  * This is whgat causes the potential energy of the certain forms of butane to be higher than others.
  * So you want anti which is the angld form.

## Steric strain in butane
* The molecule is not stable when you have the steric strain in the totally eclipsed form
* The two methyl fgroups repel iach other, causing steric strain or steric hindrance
* They don't like each other. The molecule is not stable and has a lot of steric strain

## Higher alkanes
* At 180 degrees it's called anticonformation -- this is the way to do it
* We always draw in a zigzag conformation because it is the lowest energty and it is the preffered way for molecules to behave.
* You never draw a straight line. Butane for example is drawn like a namecheap logo. This is the way to do it
* The most stable confoirmation you can have is zig zag.

## Cycloalkanes
* Cycloalkanes are rings of carbon atoms - ch2 groups
* The molecular formula of cycloalkane is CnH2n
* We just name it cyclo and the nthe name of it for example cyclo propane or cyclobutane. This is a very easy way to name
* Nonpolar
* relatively inert
* boiling point depends on the size of the molecule
* Nomenclature -- cycloalkane is usually the main chain to use.
* You have a structure ethylcyclopentane -- it is a 5 carbon ring with a ethyl group on one carbon.
* If only one alkyl grop is present, then no number is necessary.
* Very simple!
* IF your ethyl is attached to a different part of the ring, it doesn't matter. The number is the same all the time.
* If you have more than one substituent, you number the carbons to give all substituents the lowest possible number.
* You want the sum of all of the position number ids to be as low as possible. E.g. 3-ethyl-1,1 is preferred over 1-ethyl-3,3.
* Numbering does not have to be clockwise.
* You can put them in any order you want, they can be clockwise or counterclockwise.

## Geometric isomers
* Cis and trans
* The two methyl aere attached to carbon 1 and carbon 2, both of them are using the wedge bond so it is a cis.
* The other one has the lines os it is trans -- on the other side of the thing
* Cis is same, trans is opposite

## Stabilities of Cycloalkanes
* 5 and 6 membered rings are the moist common
* Carbons of cycloalkanes are sp3 hyvridized and thus require an angle of 109.5
* Angle other than 109.5 is not the optimum overlap -- anngle strain
* Angle strain is sometimes called baeyer strain
* Test of heats of combustion -- shows the amount of angle strain
* Torsional starin in Cyclopropane
  * C-C bonds are eclipsed, generaton torsional strain contributing to total ring strain
  * Cyclobutane -- C4H8, results form angle strain from the bond angles to 90 and torsional strain
* Nonpolar cyclobutane -- not planare but bent a little bit to relieve some of the interactions. Adopts a folded conformation.
* Cyclohexane -- Increasing the number of carbon -- envelope. Extra stability but not as stable as cyclohexane.

## Cyclohexane
* Multiple configuration -- chair configuration
* Looks like a chair and theres a "cartoon with a guy on it"
* Multiple things going on in cyclohexane.
* Protons point up, down, and to the sides
* Newman projection of cycloexane -- looks very peaceful.
* The twist boat conformation -- fewer eclipsing bond interactions and less interference between the flagpole hydrogens
* Conformational energy diagram of cyclohexane -- chair to twistboat to boat to halfchair -- conversion between different states
* Chair chair interconversion -- the molecule is not stable so the molecule interconverts to boat then to another chair -- moves.
* Axial methyl in methylcyclohexane -- interaction between the methyl substituent with a carbon in the interior
* The same structure has some interaction with the cloud of electrons -- gauche
* When you have a big bulky substituent, it will quickly interconvert to reduce its energy.
* Equatorial.
* Methyl is in anticonfiguration with the other carbon -- that's the good way to do it
* 1,3-Diaxial Interaction -- the axial substituent interferes with axial hydrogens on C3 and C5-- 1,3-diaxial interaction.
* T-butyl cyclohexane -- when in axial it will immediately convert to the equatorial position.

## Cis 1,3 dimethyl
* Cis means you have two methyl groups in the axial or equatorial positions.
* The conformatuion with both methyl groups equatorial is the more stable one.
* When you have cis 1,2 dimethyl, both have to point up or down (axial/equatorial)
* Trans dimethyl cyclohexane -both in axial or both in equatorial
